---
layout: post
mathjax: true
---

# Lecture 2: Core Ideas from Number Theory

**Topics in Information Theory, Chaos & Causal Learning**

**Date: January 23, 2020**

  

------

#### Infinitude of the Primes

Two notions held most beautiful in mathematics: prime numbers and infinity. Combining the two presents the notion of infinitude of prime numbers. Euclid in 500 BC proved the set of prime numbers, $$P$$ to be an $$\infty$$ (or *unbounded*) set - that there is no *last* prime number.

Challenger-prover paradigm is a *game-theoretic* way of proving where a challenger picks an $$M$$, and the prover finds a prime $$p$$ greater than $$M$$. More generally, the challenger picks a bound and the prover defeats this bound.
$$
example:\ \text{let}\ M=10^{20},\ \text{then}\ \exists p\in P\ \text{s.t.}\ p>M
$$
Euclid's proof for the infinitude of primes builds upon the fundamental theorem of arithmetic (FToA), which states that any integer $$N$$ can be written as a product of prime numbers. Proving the FToA is non-trivial and involves complex analysis. 
$$
\text{FToA}:\forall N\in\N,\ N=\prod_{i=1}^k p_i^{a_i}\quad \text{where}\ p_i\in P,\ a_i\in\Z^+\cup\{0\} \\
\small{^*decomposition\ of\ N\ is\ unique\ up\ to\ a\ permutation}
$$
Euclid's proof by contradiction:
$$
\text{Assume that } P \text{ is bounded by } p_M \\
P = \{p_1,p_2,\ldots,p_M\} \\
\text{Using FToA, let } x = \prod_{i=1}^M p_i \quad (\text{note that }x > p_M) \\
\text{adding 1 leaves a remainder: } x = \prod_{i=1}^M p_i+1 \quad \text{as }p_i\nmid x \\
\text{thus, either } x\text{ is a prime } \rightarrow \text{ contradicts the original assumption, or} \\
\text{there exists a prime} \notin P \text{ that divides } x \rightarrow \text{ contradicts the bound on }P \\
$$
Euler's proof for the infinitude of primes builds on from the following observations about harmonic series.
$$
S_a = \sum_{n=0}^{\infin}\frac{1}{2^n} = 1+\frac{1}{2^1}+\frac{1}{2^2}+\frac{1}{2^3}+\ldots=2 \qquad \text{(converges)} \\
S = \sum_{n=1}^{\infin}\frac{1}{n} = 1+\frac{1}{2}+\frac{1}{3}+\frac{1}{4}+\ldots=\infin \qquad \text{(diverges, slowly)}
$$
Similar to the challenger-prover paradigm, if $$T$$, a subset of $$S$$ representing a lower bound, diverges, then $$S$$ also diverges. However, if the lower bound converges then $$S$$ may or may not converge, while if an upper bound on $$S$$ converges then $$S$$ also converges.
$$
\text{choose a }T \le S \quad \text{by replacing numbers from } S\ \text{ s.t. }\ T \rightarrow\infin \\
S =1+\frac{1}{2}+(\frac{1}{3}+\frac{1}{4})+(\frac{1}{5}+\frac{1}{6}+\frac{1}{7}+\frac{1}{8})+\ldots \quad\small{(parentheses\ represent\ partial\ sums)}\\
T =1+\frac{1}{2}+(\frac{1}{4}+\frac{1}{4})+(\frac{1}{8}+\frac{1}{8}+\frac{1}{8}+\frac{1}{8})+\ldots \quad\small{(parentheses\ represent\ partial\ sums)}\\
T =1+\frac{1}{2}+(\frac{1}{2}) +(\frac{1}{2})+\ldots \qquad \text{(diverges, thus S diverges)} \\
$$
This proof of the divergence of the harmonic series was first proposed by [Nicole Oresme](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicole_Oresme#Mathematics) in the 14th century. In his elegant proof, Euler showed that a harmonic series of prime numbers diverges:
$$
A = \frac{1}{2}+\frac{1}{3}+\frac{1}{5}+\frac{1}{7}+\ldots+\frac{1}{p_m} \\
A\rightarrow \infin\implies P\rightarrow \infin \\
\text{where } P = \{p_1, p_2, \ldots,p_m\}
$$

------

#### More on prime numbers

Twin primes are pairs of prime numbers separated by 2 $$(p,p+2)$$. That there are $$\infin$$ of these is the *twin prime conjecture*, a special case of [Polignac's conjecture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twin_prime#Polignac's_conjecture) which states that there are $\infin$ consecutive primes separated by a gap $k$.

$$\rightarrow$$ Prove that the number in between twin primes $$(p+1)$$ is divisible by 6

The [Goldbach conjecture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goldbach%27s_conjecture) states that every even integer greater than 2 can be expressed as the sum of 2 primes. Example: $$12=5+7$$

------

#### Parallel postulate

Euclid's fifth postulate is taken as as an *axiom* if there is exactly <u>one</u> possible line parallel to a given line passing through a point. Depending on the choice of axiom for the number of possible parallel lines, broadly three systems of geometry result:

- $$0\rightarrow$$ Non-Euclidean (spherical/elliptical) geometry where the definition of a line (shortest path between 2 points) is fulfilled by great circles (equators) or *geodesics*. All geodesics on a sphere intersect, in other words, no geodesics are parallel to each other.

  *Fun fact: Airplanes travel along geodesics*

- $$1\rightarrow$$ Euclidean geometry, example $$\mathbb R^2$$

- $$\infin\rightarrow$$ Non-Euclidean (hyperbolic) geometry, used to model space-time in theory of relativity.

------

#### Infinity

Since $$\N$$ is countably infinite, another set $A$ can be shown to be countably infinite by demonstrating a *one-to-one* mapping, $$f$$, from $$A$$ to $$\N$$. This one-to-one mapping shows identical cardinality. Example: $$f:x\rightarrow \frac{x}{2}$$

**Functions and Mappings**

<u>*Injection (one-to-one):*</u> 
$$
f:D\rightarrow R\ \text{where}\ \forall x_1,x_2\in D,\, y_1=f(x_1),\ y_2=f(x_2),\ \text{s.t. }x_1\ne x_2\implies y_1\ne y_2
$$
Example of one-to-one but not onto: $\N \rightarrow \N:$ $x\rightarrow 2x$

<u>*Surjection (onto):*</u> 
$$
f:D\rightarrow R\ \text{where}\ \forall y\in R,\, \exists x\in D,\ \text{s.t. }y=f(x)
$$
Example of onto but not one-to-one: $\R \rightarrow \R^+\cup\{0\}:$ $x\rightarrow |x|$

<u>*Bijection (one-to-one & onto):*</u> Both *Injective* and *Surjective*, are invertible.

Example: $\N \rightarrow \N :$ $f(x)\rightarrow x$

The set of rationals, $\Q = \{\dfrac{p}{q},\ \ p,q\in \Z, q\ne 0\}$ can be thus shown to be countably infinite.

------

#### Properties of Numbers

As we expand the space of numbers from integers and natural numbers to real and complex numbers, we go from countably infinite to uncountably infinite. There is a loss of certain properties with each level of construction in the hierarchy of numbers:

- $\N,\Z\ \small{countably_{\infin}}\ \rightarrow$ *nextness* or *adjacency* of numbers
- $\Q\ \small{countably_{\infin}}\rightarrow$ *dense*, no *nextness*, between any 2 elements, another element can be found.
- $\R\ \small{uncountably_{\infin}}\rightarrow$ ordering exists, but *denumerable* ($\R\not\rightarrow\N$)
- $\C\ \small{uncountably_{\infin}}\rightarrow$ no ordering exists

Certain properties are also gained with each level:

- $\N,\Z \rightarrow$ *possible solutions of Diophantine equations*
- $\Q\rightarrow$ solutions of all equations of the form $ax+b=0,\ a,b\in \Z$ 
- $\R\rightarrow$ Can be divided into rationals and irrationals. Another way is *either* algebraic ($x\in R$ s.t. $x$ is a solution to algebraic equations) *or* transcendental ($\subset$ irrationals, not solutions to any algebraic equations)
- $\C\rightarrow$ Always contains all possible solutions to $a_1x^n+a_2x^{n-1}+\ldots+a_n=0,\  a_i\in\R,\C$ (Fundamental Theorem of Algebra)

------

<u>Further explorations:</u>

1. *Proofs from the Book* by Aigner & Ziegler [(link)](https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783642008566)
2. *The Man Who Loved Only Numbers* by Paul Hoffman on Paul Erdős [(link)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Man_Who_Loved_Only_Numbers) [(lecture)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9634A0iBw7w)
3. *N is a number* - a documentary on Paul Erdős [(playlist)](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6180F0E2E9F9F293)
4. *Number Theory in Science and Communication* by Manfred Schroeder [(link)](https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783540852971)
5. *Classification of all the numbers* by Matt Parker on Numberphile [(link)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5TkIe60y2GI)

